It's hard (though possible) to imagine a script that doesn't access environment variables. In Haskell ecosystem there is a good built-in module [System.Environment](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/base-4.12.0.0/docs/System-Environment.html) that does the job, but it has several drawbacks. First of all, it uses `String` data type as input and as an output. And secondly, it lives in `IO`. Both of these drawbacks are not that critical, but calling all these `Text.pack`, `Text.unpack` and `liftIO` in every program drives me nuts. So several years ago (somewhere in 2016) I decided to write a [simple library](https://github.com/d12frosted/env-extra) that wraps it for me.

I've been using this library for a long time and today I uploaded it to [Hackage](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/env-extra). While it's really small, I still think that some of you might find it useful, because it has nice features that original `System.Environment` doesn't have. Let's take a look!

<!--more-->

So in the nutshell, there are three functions to access environment variables:

- `envMaybe` of type `( MonadIO m, IsString a ) => Text -> m (Maybe a)` - a wrapper for `lookupEnv`. Aside from working with `Text` input it also lives in `MonadIO` and returns an `IsString`, which the most interesting part here. I will talk about it shortly.
- `getEnv` of type `( MonadThrow m, MonadIO m, IsString a ) => Text -> m a` - the unsafe version of `envMaybe`.
- `envRead` of type `( MonadIO m ) => Reader a -> Text -> m (Maybe a)` - a helper function that also reads (or parses) a value from environment variable by specifying the [Reader](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/text-1.2.4.0/docs/Data-Text-Read.html).

In most cases my choice is between `envMaybe` and `getEnv` depending on my desire to handle missing variable.

``` haskell
> envMaybe "NAME"
Nothing

> setEnv "NAME" "Boris"

> envMaybe "NAME"
Just "Boris"
```

What's interesting, `envMaybe` is polymorphic in it's return type, which means that it plays nicely in composition chains and you don't need to explicitly convert between `Text`, `String`, `ByteString` data types.

``` haskell
> :t putStrLn
putStrLn :: String -> IO ()

> getEnv "NAME" >>= putStrLn
Boris

> setEnv "SOME_VAR" "NAME"

> getEnv "SOME_VAR"
"NAME"

> getEnv "SOME_VAR" >>= getEnv
"Boris"
```

The other function that I use (though not that often) is `envRead`.

``` haskell
> setEnv "AGE" "10"

> envRead decimal "AGE"
Just 10

> envRead hexadecimal "AGE"
Just 16

> envRead hexadecimal "HOME"
Nothing
```

In some rare cases you might want to use the `Read` instance for parsing. Though it's not advisable.

``` haskell
> data Status = SomeStatus1 | SomeStatus2 deriving (Show, Read, Eq)

> getEnv "STATUS"
"SomeStatus2"

> envRead read "STATUS" :: IO (Maybe Status)
Just SomeStatus2
```

I hope you'll find this library helpful. Please do send me your comments, idea and thoughts! And any contribution is welcome!
